Dev/production doc (#824)
AMD-AGI/Primus: production_docs/01-getting-started/installation.md

# Installation and setup

> This guide covers supported platforms, prerequisites, and deployment patterns: **container (recommended)** and **bare metal** for the environment, plus **multi-node distributed training** (Slurm recommended).

Reviewer: What does "the environment" mean?

---

## Supported platforms

| Requirement | Notes                                                                                                       |
| ----------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **OS**      | Linux (ROCm-supported distributions per AMD documentation).                                                 |
| **ROCm**    | **≥ 7.0** recommended.                                                                                      |

> | **GPUs**    | AMD Instinct **MI300X**, **MI325X**, **MI355X** (or other ROCm-supported Instinct SKUs your site supports). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **GPUs**    | AMD Instinct™ **MI300X**, **MI325X**, **MI355X** (or other ROCm-supported Instinct SKUs your site supports). |
```

---

## Prerequisites

| Prerequisite                                                  | Purpose                                       |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| **AMD Instinct GPUs**                                         | Training and benchmarks execute on GPU.       |
| **ROCm drivers and user-space stack**                         | Required for HIP, RCCL, and ML frameworks.    |
| **Docker ≥ 24.0** (or Podman with compatible GPU passthrough) | Container mode and reproducible environments. |
| **git**                                                       | Clone the repository and submodules.          |

### Quick environment checks

```bash
rocm-smi
docker --version
```

`rocm-smi` should list your GPUs; `docker --version` should report **24.0** or newer.

---

## Container setup (recommended)

> AMD publishes training docker images monthly, which provides consistent, ready-to-run environment optimized for AMD GPUs. It is recommended to use the AMD published training Docker images together with this Primus-LM repository to run your training jobs. It supports pre-training and post-training workflows with multiple backends including Megatron-LM, TorchTitan, and JAX MaxText, alongside ROCm-optimized components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AMD publishes training docker images monthly, providing consistent, ready-to-run environment optimized for AMD GPUs. It is recommended to use the AMD-published training Docker images together with this Primus-LM repository to run your training jobs. The images support pre-training and post-training workflows with multiple backends including Megatron-LM, TorchTitan, and JAX MaxText, alongside ROCm-optimized components.
```

Check the AMD published training Docker images here:

- For Megatron-LM and TorchTitan backends: [https://hub.docker.com/r/rocm/primus/tags](https://hub.docker.com/r/rocm/primus/tags)
- For MaxText backend: [https://hub.docker.com/r/rocm/jax-training/tags](https://hub.docker.com/r/rocm/jax-training/tags)

### 1. Pull the image

```bash
# For Megatron-LM and TorchTitan backends
docker pull rocm/primus:v26.3
# For MaxText backend
docker pull rocm/jax-training:v26.3
```

### 2. Clone the repository

Submodules are required for third-party backends and tools:

```bash
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/AMD-AIG-AIMA/Primus.git
cd Primus
# checkout the branch for the specific release
git checkout release/v26.3
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### 3. Run a verification benchmark

From the repository root:

```bash
./primus-cli container --image rocm/primus:v26.3 -- \
  benchmark gemm --M 4096 --N 4096 --K 4096
```

> A successful run exercises the GPU stack and Primus CLI wiring without launching a full training job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successful run validates the GPU stack and Primus CLI wiring without launching a full training job.
```

---

## Bare-metal (host) setup

> > **We strongly recommend the [container setup](#container-setup-recommended) above.** The AMD published training Docker image is the tested, reproducible, and best-supported path. Build the full stack on a bare-metal host only when containers are not an option (for example, policy or operational constraints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **The [container setup](#container-setup-recommended) above is strongly recommend.** The AMD-published training Docker image is the tested, reproducible, and best-supported path. Build the full stack on a bare-metal host only when containers are not an option (for example, due to policy or operational constraints).
```

### What to expect

> Reproducing the training environment on the host means building the **same stack the Docker image ships**, mostly from source. This is a **long, build-heavy process**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reproducing the training environment on the host means building the **same stack the Docker image ships**, mostly from source. This is a **long, build-heavy process** that requires:
```

- Several **source-built kernel libraries** (Flash Attention, TransformerEngine, aiter, Primus-Turbo, grouped_gemm, causal-conv1d, mamba) compiled against ROCm.
- A **machine with many CPU cores, ample RAM, and tens of GB of free disk**.

> - Expect a **multi-hour first build**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A long time (expect a **multi-hour first build**).
```

### What a complete host environment needs

| Layer                   | What it provides                                                                 | How it is installed              |
| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------- |

> | Kernel / hardware       | AMD GPU driver (amdgpu KMD) and device access (`/dev/kfd`, `/dev/dri`)            | OS / admin (root, one-time)      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Kernel/hardware       | AMD GPU driver (amdgpu KMD) and device access (`/dev/kfd`, `/dev/dri`)            | OS/administrator (root, one-time)      |
```

Reviewer: Consider rewriting "OS/administrator" to something else to avoid ambiguity?

| OS libraries            | Build toolchain and runtime libs (`g++`, `git`, RDMA, hwloc, etc.)               | `apt` (root, one-time)           |
| ROCm user-space         | `rocm-sdk-devel` + device wheels — **no system-wide ROCm install required**       | `pip` (TheRock wheels, in venv)  |

> | Deep learning framework | ROCm-enabled PyTorch (`torch`, `torchvision`, `torchaudio`, `apex`)              | `pip` (TheRock wheels, in venv)  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Deep learning framework | ROCm-enabled PyTorch (`torch`, `torchvision`, `torchaudio`, `apex`)              | `pip` (TheRock wheels, in `venv`)  |
```

> | Accelerated kernels     | Flash Attention, TransformerEngine, aiter, Primus-Turbo, grouped_gemm, mamba     | build from source (in venv)      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Accelerated kernels     | Flash Attention, TransformerEngine, AITER, Primus-Turbo, Grouped GEMM, Mamba     | build from source (in `venv`)      |
```

> | Multi-node comms        | UCX, OpenMPI, rocSHMEM, AMD AINIC — only for distributed (multi-node) training    | build from source / `apt`        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Multi-node communications        | UCX, OpenMPI, rocSHMEM, AMD AINIC—only for distributed (multi-node) training    | build from source/ `apt`        |
```

> | Primus + Python deps    | Primus, submodules, and training libraries (datasets, transformers, wandb, etc.) | `git` + `pip` (in venv)          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Primus + Python dependencies    | Primus, submodules, and training libraries (datasets, transformers, wandb, etc.) | `git` + `pip` (in `venv`)          |
```

### General approach

1. **System packages (root, one-time):** install the build toolchain and, for multi-node, the RDMA/networking libraries via `apt`. The GPU kernel driver must already be loaded.

> 2. **Python virtual environment (no root):** create a venv, then install ROCm and PyTorch from AMD's TheRock multi-arch wheels — this replaces a system ROCm install and keeps everything unprivileged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Python virtual environment (no root):** create a `venv`, then install ROCm and PyTorch from AMD's TheRock multi-arch wheels—this replaces a system ROCm install and keeps everything unprivileged.
```

> 3. **Build the accelerated kernels from source** against the in-venv ROCm and your GPU architecture (`gfx942` for MI300X/MI325X, `gfx950` for MI350X/MI355X).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Build the accelerated kernels from source** against the ROCm in `venv`   and your GPU architecture (`gfx942` for MI300X/MI325X, `gfx950` for MI350X/MI355X).
```

> 4. **Install Primus and its Python dependencies**, then persist the required environment variables (ROCm paths, `NVTE_*` flags) in your venv activation script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Install Primus and its Python dependencies**, then persist the required environment variables (ROCm paths, `NVTE_*` flags) in your `venv` activation script.
```

> 5. **(Optional) Build the multi-node communication stack** (UCX, OpenMPI, rocSHMEM) only if you need distributed-over-RDMA training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **(Optional) Build the multi-node communication stack** (UCX, OpenMPI, rocSHMEM) only if you require RDMA-based distributed training.
```

### Detailed instructions

> Follow the full, step-by-step guide — including exact pinned versions, environment variables, and automated install scripts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the full, step-by-step guide here, which includes the exact pinned versions, environment variables, and automated install scripts:
```

### Verify

After the build, validate the environment and run a benchmark directly on the host (no container):

```bash
./primus-cli direct -- benchmark gemm --M 4096 --N 4096 --K 4096
```

---

## Multi-node distributed training (Slurm recommended)

For training jobs that span **multiple nodes**, we recommend using **[Slurm](https://slurm.schedmd.com/)**. Slurm is a cluster workload manager and job scheduler: it allocates nodes and GPUs, places your job on them, launches one task per node, and injects the topology information (node list, node count, per-node rank) that distributed PyTorch needs. `primus-cli` has a built-in **`slurm` mode** that wraps `srun`/`sbatch` and wires this topology into the training launcher for you.

### Cluster baseline

Before launching distributed jobs, ensure every participating node has:

- The **same software stack** — use the **same container image** on all nodes (recommended), or an identical bare-metal install (see sections above).
- A **shared filesystem** for code, datasets, checkpoints, and logs (e.g. NFS/Lustre), mounted at the same path on every node.

> - **Working inter-node networking** — for best performance, a high-speed RDMA fabric (InfiniBand / RoCE / AMD AINIC) with RCCL able to select the right interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A working inter-node networking** — for best performance, use a high-speed RDMA fabric (InfiniBand / RoCE / AMD AINIC) and ensure RCCL can select the right interface.
```

### Setting up Slurm

> Standing up Slurm itself is a cluster-administration task and is outside Primus's scope. Follow the official documentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up Slurm itself is a cluster-administration task and is outside Primus's scope. Follow the official documentation:
```

- [Slurm Quick Start (users)](https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart.html)
- [Slurm Quick Start Administrator Guide (install & configure)](https://slurm.schedmd.com/quickstart_admin.html)

> Once `sinfo` and `srun` work on your login node, Primus can submit jobs to it. If you don't administer the cluster, your site admin typically provides the partition, account, and reservation names you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once `sinfo` and `srun` work on your login node, Primus can submit jobs to it. If you don't administer the cluster, your site administrator typically provides the partition, account, and reservation names you need.
```

### Launching with `primus-cli slurm`

The Slurm wrapper uses a single `--` separator:

> - **Before the `--`**: the launcher (`srun` or `sbatch`, default `srun`) and Slurm flags (`-N`, `-p`, `--nodelist`, `--account`, `--qos`, `--reservation`, …).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Before the `--`**: Put the launcher (`srun` or `sbatch`, default `srun`) and Slurm flags (`-N`, `-p`, `--nodelist`, `--account`, `--qos`, `--reservation`, …).
```

> - **After the `--`**: the Primus command to run (`train` / `benchmark` / …). It runs inside the container image (see [Selecting the container image](#selecting-the-container-image) below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **After the `--`**: Put the Primus command to run (`train` / `benchmark` / …). It runs inside the container image (see [Selecting the container image](#selecting-the-container-image) below).
```

```bash
cd /path/to/Primus

# Pretrain on 2 nodes via srun
./primus-cli slurm srun -N 2 \
  -- train pretrain \
  --config examples/megatron/configs/MI300X/llama3.1_8B-BF16-pretrain.yaml
```

> Add the global `--dry-run` flag (before the launcher) to print the exact command without executing it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the global `--dry-run` flag before the launcher to print the exact command without executing it:
```

```bash
./primus-cli --dry-run slurm srun -N 2 \
  -- train pretrain --config <your-config>.yaml
```

> See `runner/README.md` and the [CLI reference](../02-user-guide/cli-reference.md) for the full set of launcher flags and scenarios.

#### Selecting the container image

> The image used for the job is resolved with the following priority (highest first):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image used for the job is resolved according to the following priority order (highest first):
```

1. **`DOCKER_IMAGE` environment variable** — overrides everything else. This is the simplest way to switch images and it propagates to all nodes:

```bash
export DOCKER_IMAGE=rocm/primus:v26.3
./primus-cli slurm srun -N 2 \
  -- train pretrain --config <your-config>.yaml
```

2. **`--image` CLI flag** — place it immediately after the `--`, before the Primus command (ignored if `DOCKER_IMAGE` is set):

```bash
./primus-cli slurm srun -N 2 \
  -- --image rocm/primus:v26.3 train pretrain --config <your-config>.yaml
```

> 3. **Config file default** — `container.options.image` in `runner/.primus.yaml` (or your `~/.primus.yaml`), which ships as `rocm/primus:v26.2`.

Reviewer 2: The Primus version numbers (v26.2/v26.3) need to be aligned, consistent with the main branch.

> 3. **Config file default** — `container.options.image` in `runner/.primus.yaml` (or your `~/.primus.yaml`), which ships as `rocm/primus:v26.2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Config file default** — `container.options.image` in `runner/.primus.yaml` (or your `~/.primus.yaml`), which is set to `rocm/primus:v26.2` by default.
```

### Distributed environment variables

Primus launches training with `torchrun`, which needs to know the cluster topology. These are the key variables:

| Variable        | Role                                                      | Default     |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- |
| `MASTER_ADDR`   | Hostname/IP of rank 0; all ranks rendezvous here.        | `localhost` |
| `MASTER_PORT`   | Port on the master used for rendezvous.                  | `1234`      |
| `NNODES`        | Number of nodes in the job.                              | `1`         |
| `NODE_RANK`     | Index of this node (0-based, unique per node).           | `0`         |
| `GPUS_PER_NODE` | GPUs (processes) to launch per node.                     | `8`         |

The total number of training processes (world size) is `NNODES × GPUS_PER_NODE`.

> **Under Slurm these are derived automatically.** `primus-cli slurm` reads Slurm's own variables and sets the Primus ones for you: `NNODES` from `SLURM_NNODES`, `NODE_RANK` from `SLURM_NODEID`, and `MASTER_ADDR` from the first host in `SLURM_NODELIST` (with `MASTER_PORT` defaulting to `1234`). You normally only set `GPUS_PER_NODE` if your nodes don't have 8 GPUs. You can still override `MASTER_PORT` (e.g. to avoid a port clash) via `--env`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Under Slurm values of these variables are derived automatically.** `primus-cli slurm` reads Slurm's own variables and sets the Primus ones for you: `NNODES` from `SLURM_NNODES`, `NODE_RANK` from `SLURM_NODEID`, and `MASTER_ADDR` from the first host in `SLURM_NODELIST` (with `MASTER_PORT` defaulting to `1234`). You normally only need to set `GPUS_PER_NODE` if your nodes don't have 8 GPUs. You can still override `MASTER_PORT` (e.g. to avoid a port clash) via `--env`.
```

### Without Slurm: Kubernetes or `parallel-ssh`

> Slurm is recommended but not required. The mechanism underneath is simple: **set the same distributed environment variables on every node, point them all at the same `MASTER_ADDR`, give each node a unique `NODE_RANK`, and run the same `primus-cli direct` command on each node.** Any tool that can run a command across nodes works — for example Kubernetes (e.g. a `PyTorchJob` / indexed Job) or `parallel-ssh`/`pdsh`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slurm is recommended but not required. The mechanism underneath is simple: **set the same distributed environment variables on every node, point them all at the same `MASTER_ADDR`, give each node a unique `NODE_RANK`, and run the same `primus-cli direct` command on each node.** Any tool that can run a command across nodes works — for example Kubernetes (e.g. a `PyTorchJob`/indexed Job) or `parallel-ssh`/`pdsh`.
```

For a 2-node job you would run, on the master (rank 0):

```bash
export NNODES=2 GPUS_PER_NODE=8 NODE_RANK=0 MASTER_ADDR=<node0-host> MASTER_PORT=1234
./primus-cli direct -- train pretrain --config <your-config>.yaml
```

and on the worker (rank 1), the same command with `NODE_RANK=1` and the same `MASTER_ADDR`:

```bash
export NNODES=2 GPUS_PER_NODE=8 NODE_RANK=1 MASTER_ADDR=<node0-host> MASTER_PORT=1234
./primus-cli direct -- train pretrain --config <your-config>.yaml
```

> With Kubernetes, inject these as container env vars (deriving `NODE_RANK` from the pod's index); with `parallel-ssh`, pass them per host. The training command itself is identical on every node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Kubernetes, inject these as container environment variables (deriving `NODE_RANK` from the pod's index); with `parallel-ssh`, pass them per host. The training command itself is identical on every node.
```

### Other important considerations

> - **Validate the cluster first.** Run the built-in preflight check across your nodes before a long job: `./primus-cli slurm srun -N <N> -- preflight`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cluster validation.** Run the built-in preflight check across your nodes before a long job: `./primus-cli slurm srun -N <N> -- preflight`.
```

> - **Networking / RCCL.** On RDMA fabrics, make sure the correct interface is selected (Primus can auto-detect; otherwise set `NCCL_SOCKET_IFNAME` / `NCCL_IB_HCA`). Use `NCCL_DEBUG=INFO` (passed via `--env`) to diagnose hangs at startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Networking/RCCL.** On RDMA fabrics, make sure the correct interface is selected (Primus should auto-detect this; if it doesn't, set `NCCL_SOCKET_IFNAME` / `NCCL_IB_HCA`). Use `NCCL_DEBUG=INFO` (passed via `--env`) to diagnose hangs at startup.
```

- **RDMA limits.** High-performance networking usually needs locked-memory limits raised (`ulimit -l unlimited`) and sometimes hugepages — configured by your admin.
- **`MASTER_PORT` must be free** on the master node and reachable from all workers; firewalls between nodes will cause rendezvous timeouts.

> - **Hugging Face access.** If your config pulls gated models/tokenizers, export `HF_TOKEN` (and ensure it's propagated to all nodes / into the container).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hugging Face access.** If your config downloads gated models or tokenizers, export `HF_TOKEN` (and ensure it's propagated to all nodes and  into the containers).
```

---

> ## Post-installation verification checklist

Reviewer: Consider adding " .... checklist (for all setup approaches)" The page is long, and it is good to let users know this tail end part applies to all approaches.

| Step                 | Check                                                                                                   |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **ROCm**             | `rocm-smi` shows expected GPUs and no driver errors.                                                    |
| **Container engine** | `docker run --rm ... rocm/primus:v26.2` (or your site’s GPU test) succeeds.                             |
| **GEMM benchmark**   | `./primus-cli` **container** or **direct** benchmark completes (see sections above).                    |
| **Preflight**        | Run preflight diagnostics: `./primus-cli direct -- preflight` (single node) or `./primus-cli slurm srun -N <N> -- preflight` (cluster).         |

> If training pulls models or tokenizers from Hugging Face Hub, configure tokens (for example `HF_TOKEN`) in the environment or container flags as required by your config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your training pulls models or tokenizers from Hugging Face Hub, configure tokens (for example `HF_TOKEN`) in the environment or container flags as required by your configuration.
```
